A fixed back off policy can be problematic in large microservice environments.
Let's look at an example to illustrate the problem.
Let's assume we have a large number of Bass Tracker Services,
and each is configured with a 1000 ms fixed back off policy.
They all make a create request to the Lake Profile
Service at exactly the same time.
The Lake Profile Service is already struggling under heavy load,
so this causes it to reject requests temporarily.
The Bass Tracker Services all back off for 1000 ms,
then they attempt the request again at the same time,
which again overwhelms the Lake Profile Service,
causing it to reject requests.
The Bass Tracker Services all back off for another 1000 ms,
then they attempt the request again at the same time,
which again overwhelms the Lake Profile Service,
causing it to reject requests.
Can you see the pattern in the problem here?
Now let's look at the exponential back off approach.
There are two properties that control exponential back off called
initial backoff interval and backoff multiplier.
Initial backoff interval is the baseline back off period.
Spring Retry will back off the first time for this period.
Backoff multiplier is the multiplier value that will be used to calculate the
next back off period from the initial back off interval.
We can set these properties any number of ways to achieve exponential back off.
However, for simplicity's sake,
we're going to keep initial backoff interval constant at
500 ms across all Bass Tracker Services.
Then we will set the backoff multiplier uniquely for each service.
Let's see how it works.
They all make a create request to the Lake Profile
Service at exactly the same time.
The Lake Profile Service is already struggling under heavy load,
so this causes it to reject requests temporarily.
The Bass Tracker Services all back off for 500 ms the first time.
Then they attempt the request again at the same time,
which again overwhelms the Lake Profile Service,
causing it to reject requests.
Now we see the magic of exponential back off.
The back off periods are calculated by multiplying the initial
backoff interval and the backoff multiplier,
which gives a unique back off period to each service.
When it comes time to retry the request,
rather than clobbering the Lake Profile Service at the same time,
the requests are interleaved,
which preserves the Lake Profile Service's bandwidth and allows each request to complete successfully.